JUDY WOODRUFF: It was a rare
Q&A: the president
of the United States face to
face with concerned
citizens during a CNN town hall
Thursday night,
the topic, gun safety and gun
rights.
President Obama made the case
for the executive
actions he announced earlier
this week, saying
his proposals balance the need
to prevent
gun deaths with the
Constitution's right to
bear arms.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
I respect the Second Amendment,
I respect
the right to bear arms. I
respect people who
want a gun for self-protection,
for hunting,
for sportsmanship.
But all of us can agree that it
makes sense
to do everything we can to keep
guns out of
the hands of people who would
try to do others
harm or to do themselves harm.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Earlier in the
day, House Speaker
Paul Ryan wrote off the
president as someone
who put too much emphasis on
limiting access
to guns, at the expense of
Second Amendment
rights.
REP. PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker
of the House:
I don't think the president -- I
think he's
been pretty hostile to the
Second Amendment
all along.
I don't think the president has
a lot of respect
for the Second Amendment. And
guess what is
one of the most important things
that we can
do as citizens, collectively, to
protect ourselves
from some possible terrorist
attack? Exercising
our Second Amendment rights.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that brings
us to the analysis
of Brooks and Corn. That's New
York Times
columnist David Brooks, and
David Corn, Washington
bureau chief for "Mother Jones"
and an analyst
for MSNBC. Mark Shields is away
this week.
We welcome you both.
DAVID CORN: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Gentlemen.
So, David Brooks, who is right?
Does the president
respect the Second Amendment or
doesn't he?
DAVID BROOKS: I have got to side
with Obama
on this one.
He -- the Second Amendment
guarantees guns,
some possession. It doesn't
guarantee all
guns. It doesn't guarantee a
freedom from
background checks. It doesn't
mean you can't
regulate them in some way.
And so I think he's been
reasonably respectful
toward the Second Amendment. I
personally
support most of what he
proposed. Do I think
it will do a lot of good?
Probably not. The
history of gun control
legislation from the
Brady Bill, backwards and
forwards, has been
that it can reduce suicides, but
it doesn't
seem to have a huge effect on
homicide rates.
So the effect of what the
president proposes
is, I think, minimal, but
probably a positive
small step in the right
direction. And it
boggles the mind to think it
would be in violation
of the Constitution.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Corn, what
about this?
Is Ryan right or is the
president?
DAVID CORN: Paul Ryan was doing
sort of a
mild version of what the
Republican conservative
line has been, which is really
to be sort
of, I think, demagogic when
talking about
President Obama, that he wants
to take guns
away.
Just earlier in the week, Marco
Rubio put
out a campaign ad saying that
the president
wants to take your guns. And
that's been the
line from the NRA Over and over
again. And
it's really not true. He can't.
And there's
nothing that he's proposed that
would take
guns away from people who
actually possess
them already.
And so I think the very
interesting thing
about the town hall meeting was
that the president
took that on directly. And he
said, there
are conspiracy theories out
there about me,
and I want to confront them. And
he wondered
why the NRA wasn't there last
night, because
they had been invited to come.
I think the reason was because
he was ready
to really call them out on that
point, and
they don't want to have that
honest disagreement
with the president.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Brooks, is
there any
movement on this issue? Are we
just frozen,
with each side standing its
ground?
DAVID BROOKS: Mm-hmm, frozen.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: You know, it's
become a cultural
issue.
And, actually, I thought Obama
is trying to
begin to defuse that, but it is
just a fact
that a lot of people, especially
in rural
parts of the country, think that
gun control
is a symbol for, we don't like
your lifestyle.
And they feel outsiders are
dictating to them
their lifestyle.
And so even non-gun owners in
rural parts
of Virginia or wherever perceive
it as hostile
elitism. And I think that's how
it's frozen.
That's why it's frozen.
DAVID CORN: It's interesting,
because that
wasn't always the case.
Back in 1994, Reagan urged
banning the making
of AK-47s and assault weapons.
Chris Christie
says that he got into politics
in the early
'90s because he wanted to do
something about
guns. Even Marco Rubio, when he
ran in 2000,
said he was for reasonable
restrictions.
So, there used to be this
ability for Democrats
and some Republicans to talk
about this stuff.
But the Republican Party, it has
just moved
so far to the right, I think
goaded by the
NRA, that there really is no
room to talk
about this without it becoming
sort of caricatures.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And there is also
conversation
in the Democratic Party. The
president also,
David Brooks, wrote an op-ed
piece for The
New York -- in your newspaper
today, in which,
among other things, he made some
of the same
arguments that he did last night
in that town
hall, but he also said: I won't
support a
candidate, even one in my own
party, who isn't
willing to go along with gun
reform, with
significant -- some people
looked at that
as a shot at Bernie Sanders.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes. Well, Sanders
has got a
lot of wiggle room. And the
president left
himself some wiggle room.
If Sanders is the nominee, I
guarantee you
Barack Obama will be there for
him.
DAVID CORN: Yes.
DAVID BROOKS: And then the other
-- if there
are any other Democrats, they
probably come
from red states and they
wouldn't want Barack
Obama campaigning for them
anyway.
So, to me, that was a sentence
without much
meaning.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But -- and in
reaction to that,
evidently, or at least because
of it, David
Corn, you had Hillary Clinton's
campaign today
pointing out that what -- some
of the past
votes of Bernie Sanders.
What is that all about?
(CROSSTALK)
DAVID CORN: Well, you know, the
rap on Hillary
Clinton within the Democratic
Party has always
been that she's not progressive
enough.
And Bernie Sanders, obviously,
on issues of
the economy, and financial
reform, and in
foreign policy, is to her left,
and probably
more in line with a lot of
people, the Democratic
primary voters.
So, guns is one place where
there is a little
distance. There is not a great
difference,
but there is some distance. You
look at some
past votes where she is more
progressive than
Bernie Sanders. And so any
chance the Hillary
Clinton campaign has to make
something out
of that, they did.
So, they leaped upon the Obama
op-ed today
to point out, well, maybe he
won't campaign
for her, just -- at least to
suggest that,
which I don't think is a
possibility.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But is that
something that
makes a difference in Iowa or
New Hampshire,
which are coming up in a few
weeks?
DAVID BROOKS: No.
DAVID CORN: I don't think...
DAVID BROOKS: There's only one
small group
of people who vote on the gun
issue. And that's
the NRA. Nobody else votes on
the gun issue
in this country, which is why
it's hard to
pass gun control legislation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, I want to
ask you about
-- there is more to talk about,
about the
Democrats.
But on the Republican side,
you're seeing
-- yes, you saw this
Clinton-Sanders back
and forth, but, on the
Republican side, among
-- David Brooks, among the
so-called establishment
Republicans, they're taking more
potshots
at one another.
You're hearing a lot of back and
forth between
Rubio and Cruz, between Rubio
and Christie.
So, what's going on over there,
or is anybody
making any headway among that
group?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, Ted Cruz is
making headway.
There's -- you begin to see
little signs of
liftoff. Trump has sort of
ceiling-ed out.
Carson is collapsing. And Cruz
is somehow
beginning to get some momentum
from Iowa and
elsewhere. And so people are
either mimicking
him, which Rubio is doing a
little by adopting
some of the dark and satanic
tones that Cruz
has, and so...
JUDY WOODRUFF: What did you --
let me just
ask, what did you just say?
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: Well, if you go to
a Cruz -- if
you watch a Cruz speech, it's
like, we have
got this enemy, we have got that
enemy, we're
going to stomp on this person,
we're going
to crush that person, we're
going to destroy
that person.
It is an ugly world in Ted
Cruz's world. And
it's combative. And it's angry,
and it's apocalyptic.
DAVID CORN: Well, actually, if
you go to a
speech from his dad, who is a
pastor, evangelical,
Rafael Cruz, it actually is
satanic.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID CORN: He -- I watched a
speech in which
he said Satan was behind the
Supreme Court
decision to legalize gay
marriage.
So, it's not...
DAVID BROOKS: OK. Well, I
withdraw the satanic
from Ted Cruz.
DAVID CORN: You're thinking that
it's political,
but, sometimes, it's literal.
DAVID BROOKS: Mephistophelian,
maybe.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: But it's dark and
combative,
and, frankly, harsh. It's a
harsh -- he gets
some jokes in the beginning, but
then it's
just, we have enemies. We're in
an apocalyptic
situation. We're on the edge of
the abyss.
You need a tough guy to beat
that back.
And that's his personality.
That's not Marco
Rubio's personality. He's a
sunny -- he's
been running the youthful
optimism campaign,
but he's beginning, to prevent
Cruz from getting
liftoff, to mimic sort of that,
get a piece
of that.
I personally think it's a
mistake, because
inauthentic -- inauthenticity
almost never
works. And so, if Cruz starts to
go like -- I
mean, if Rubio starts to go like
Cruz, he
just doesn't look like himself,
and that bothers
people.
DAVID CORN: I think the
interesting dynamic
is, a few months ago, the
conventional wisdom,
which has been wrong at every
turn of this
campaign, was that Trump would
kind of fade
by the beginning of the voting,
and there
would be a couple different
spots for people
to land in.
And, right now, Trump hasn't
faded. Cruz has
sort of moved up, but he is not
an establishment
candidate. So that has left the
so-called
establishment candidates,
whether it's Rubio,
Kasich, Christie, whoever you
put in that
group, fighting for third place.
And I think the desperation
level has just
really amped up. And I see them
all as, like,
guys in a pool treading water
and trying to
splash water in the face of the
others, because
they're so desperate not to be
cut out...
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID CORN: ... because Cruz and
Trump seem
to have a lock, at least in
Iowa, on the first
two positions.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, in New
Hampshire, it seems
to me there's more room to play.
DAVID CORN: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: To keep the water
analogy,
rather than the satanic analogy
there.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID CORN: I think so, too.
But they kind of all seemed to
make a decision
in December that they had to do
-- they had
to have some sort of a showing
in Iowa, because
there just isn't enough room for
The train
out of Manchester at the end of
that...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: But is any one of
them -- you
mentioned Christie, Kasich,
Rubio.
DAVID CORN: Oh, Jeb Bush.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: You didn't --
neither one of
you has mentioned Jeb Bush.
DAVID CORN: Oh, yes. There is
this guy named
Jeb Bush, yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is any one of
them making headway,
the kind of headway that could
last for a
few weeks?
DAVID CORN: Well, no one seems
to be having
a breakout moment.
Christie has been moving up a
little bit,
only in New Hampshire. Rubio has
had a little
bit of burst and then kind of
leveled out.
So, maybe we will be surprised
the first week
in February in New Hampshire,
but, so far,
I don't see anybody coming out
of the pack
here.
DAVID BROOKS: Right.
Yes, I still think it will be a
Cruz-Rubio
thing by the end of the first
two. But then
you go down South, and Cruz has
some natural
turf to run there. And so he
just has a straighter
line to the nomination.
I personally think his
personality is not
ideal for a candidate in
likability.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You mean Cruz.
DAVID BROOKS: But -- I'm trying
to compensate
for my past crudeness.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Cruz, yes, yes.
DAVID BROOKS: And so -- but he
-- if you look
now, I still think he's the guy
with the straightest
line to the nomination.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you don't --
you -- specifically,
you have mentioned Rubio a few
times. You
don't see Christie? You don't
see Kasich,
Bush?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, Christie is
like -- he's
like what McCain did in '08. He
just sits
there, and has town hall after
town hall in
New Hampshire.
And, like McCain, he's a genius
at formulation.
He's great at riffling. And so
it's working
for him. So, he's coming up. And
you begin
to see people taking shots at
Christie. But
he's not acceptable to all parts
of the party.
Cruz -- Rubio is acceptable to
all parts of
the party, which makes him the
most viable
alternative.
DAVID CORN: Well, not on
immigration, though.
That is still a very big
liability for Rubio.
Eventually, he has to get votes
from the Republican
base. The Republican base hates
anything to
do with immigration reform. And
he has tried
to run away from that. But if he
gets closer,
other people will remind the
base of where
he used to be.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, I differ on
that.
The people who stand up at these
meetings,
they tend to not have any
tolerance for what
Rubio did a couple years ago.
But if you poll
Republican primary voters, there
are some
polls where a majority favor
some sort of
path to citizenship. So, among
the actual
voters, the silent majority,
there is a lot
more flexibility than you would
think if you
just listen to the questions at
the town halls.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You get the sense
Republican
primary voters may be
struggling, those who
haven't decided yet may be
struggling still
about what to do.
The health care reform law, ACA,
the Republicans
in the House finally got enough
votes, David
this, week. The Senate had
already passed
repeal. Now the House has. They
got it to
the president's desk. Now, he's
vetoed it.
But Paul Ryan, we hear him
saying today, we're
going to -- this isn't the last
you heard
about this.
Is the ACA in real jeopardy
here?
DAVID BROOKS: No. No.
Even if a Republican wins, it's
entrenched.
The systemic disruption that
would caused
by simply getting rid of it
would be catastrophic
for a lot of companies and a lot
of actual
people who are actually doing
stuff on the
ground.
If a Republican got in, it would
change a
lot. But, frankly, if a Democrat
gets in,
it is going to change a lot.
Some of the really
startling premium hikes that
we're seeing
from some of the insurance
companies are going
to cause huge problems down the
road.
So, even if a Democrat gets in,
there's going
to have to be some changes. But
it's very
hard to see you just -- just
uprooting it?
It's too deeply entrenched.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do you see?
DAVID CORN: It wasn't even
repealed. They
repealed the part of the law
that requires
people to have insurance, but
they kept in
the stuff that's popular, which
is, if you
have preexisting conditions, you
can get coverage.
Anyone can get coverage.
But the problem is, if you take
away the requirement,
and you just leave the ability
of people with
preexisting conditions to get
coverage, then
premiums truly skyrocket.
So, what they were doing, they
were voting
for a way to create a death
spiral without
replacing it with anything. So
they don't
want this bill to pass. And, if
you look at
-- in Kentucky, a good case
study, where a
Tea Party candidate won saying
he would repeal
Obamacare, Bevin, he became
governor.
And in between New Year's Day
and Christmas,
he very quietly said he wasn't
going to get
rid of the Medicaid expansion
that he promised
to, because it's working in
Kentucky.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you're saying
that's a
model for what is -- a
forerunner of what's
happening in Washington?
DAVID CORN: Yes, I don't --
listen, they can't
get rid of it without tremendous
dislocation
to real people. They will pay a
real political
cost.
And they haven't suggested an
alternative.
So I think it was just all
showmanship. And
it was kind of funny that Paul
Ryan was saying,
look what we have accomplished
today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we will
leave it there
with what we accomplished here.
David Corn, David Brooks, we
thank you both.
DAVID CORN: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thanks.